Building my first extension guide (#2406)
quarkusio/quarkus: docs/src/main/asciidoc/building-my-first-extension-guide.adoc

---------------
$ git clone https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus.git
$ cd ./quarkus/extensions
$ mkdir smallrye-health
---------------

Your extension should be a multi-module project. So let's start by the parent `smallrye-health/pom.xml`.
[source, xml]
---------------
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<project xmlns="http://maven.apache.org/POM/4.0.0"
         xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance"
         xsi:schemaLocation="http://maven.apache.org/POM/4.0.0 http://maven.apache.org/xsd/maven-4.0.0.xsd">
    <parent>
        <artifactId>quarkus-build-parent</artifactId>
        <groupId>io.quarkus</groupId>
        <version>999-SNAPSHOT</version>
        <relativePath>../../build-parent/pom.xml</relativePath>
    </parent>
    <modelVersion>4.0.0</modelVersion>

    <artifactId>quarkus-smallrye-health-parent</artifactId>
    <name>Quarkus - SmallRye Health</name>

    <packaging>pom</packaging>
    <modules>
        <module>deployment</module>
        <module>runtime</module>
    </modules>
</project>
---------------

Your extension is a child project of `quarkus-build-parent` and declares 2 sub-modules deployment and runtime. It's time now to create them.

> === The Deployment module

Reviewer: Maybe update this since we have a `create-extension` mojo thanks to https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/pull/3390 and https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/pull/3191.

Building my first Quarkus Extension

> -----------------------------------

Reviewer 2: Could you follow the style we use for the titles in the other adoc documents?

> https://quarkus.io/extensions/[Quarkus extensions] enhance your application just as projects dependencies do. The role of the extensions is to do all the technical piping to make third-party libraries/technologies Quarkus-compatible. This is how you can use your battle-tested ecosystem and take advantage of Quarkus perfomance and native compilation

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
https://quarkus.io/extensions/[Quarkus extensions] enhance your application just as projects dependencies do. The role of the extensions is to do all the technical piping to make third-party libraries/technologies Quarkus-compatible. This is how you can use your battle-tested ecosystem and take advantage of Quarkus performance and native compilation
```

> https://quarkus.io/extensions/[Quarkus extensions] enhance your application just as projects dependencies do. The role of the extensions is to do all the technical piping to make third-party libraries/technologies Quarkus-compatible. This is how you can use your battle-tested ecosystem and take advantage of Quarkus perfomance and native compilation

Reviewer 2: It's not only about making libraries Quarkus-compatible. It's also about leveraging Quarkus paradigms to integrate seamlessly a library into Quarkus.

> https://quarkus.io/extensions/[Quarkus extensions] enhance your application just as projects dependencies do. The role of the extensions is to do all the technical piping to make third-party libraries/technologies Quarkus-compatible. This is how you can use your battle-tested ecosystem and take advantage of Quarkus perfomance and native compilation

Reviewer 2: A new line for each sentence is better (they will be concatenated by asciidoctor if it's just a new line). That way diffs are easier to read in the long run.

Prerequisites
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

To complete this guide, you need:

* less than 30 minutes

> 

Reviewer 2: We don't need additional blank lines here.

> * https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus[Quarkus sources ]

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus[Quarkus sources]
```

* an IDE

* JDK 1.8+ installed with JAVA_HOME configured appropriately

* Apache Maven 3.5.3+

Basic Concepts
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> First thing first, we will need to start some basic concepts.

Reviewer 2: to start **with** ?

Reviewer 3: If you prefer to keep the current wording, it should be `First thing*s* first`

> * JVM mode Vs Native mode

Reviewer 2: I think it's `vs` without the capital.

  ** Quarkus is before all a Java framework, that means you can develop, package and run classic JAR application, that's what we call *JVM mode*.

>   ** Thanks to https://graalvm.org/[GraalVM] you can compile your Java application into machine specific code (like you do in Go or C++) and that's what we call *Native Mode*.

Reviewer 3: `before all` should probably be `above all` or `first and foremost`

The operation of compiling Java bytecode into a native system-specific machine code is named *Ahead of Time Compilation* (aka. AoT).

> * Build time Vs. Run time

Reviewer 2: Same here about `vs`.

Reviewer 3: I think `aka.` should either be `a.k.a.` or `aka`

>   ** The Build time corresponds to all the actions you apply to your Java source files to convert them into something runnable (class files, jar/war, native images). Usually this stage is composed by the compilation, annotation processing, bytecode generation, etc. At this point, everything is under developer's scope and control.

Reviewer 3: `is composed by` is probably better as `is composed of`

  ** The Run time is all the actions that happens when you execute your application. It's obviously focused on starting your business-oriented actions but it relies on a lot of technical actions like loading libraries and configuration files, scanning the application's classpath, configuring the dependency injection, setting up your Object-Relationnal Mapping, instanciating your REST controllers, etc.

> Usually, Java frameworks do their bootstrapping during the Run time before actually starting your application "Business oriented layer". During the bootstrap frameworks dynamically collect metadata by scanning the classpath to find configurations, entity definitions, dependency injection binding, etc. in order to instanciate through reflection the proper obejcts. The main consequences are:

Reviewer 4: This sentence is weird and contains typo in _instantiate_ and _objects_:

_in order to instan**c**iate through reflection the proper ob**ej**cts_

Can we change it to:

_in order to instan**t**iate proper objects through reflection_

* Delaying the readiness of your application: you need to wait couple of seconds before actually serve a business request.

> * Having a peak of resource consumption at bootstrap: In a constrained environment, you will need to size the needed resources based on your technical boostrap need rather than your actual business needs.

Reviewer 2: s/boostrap/bootstrap/
I'm not totally sure this is really a thing? But I must admit I never worked in contrained environments.

Reviewer 4: I strongly agree with consequence given by @danielpetisme. For example, when on AWS EC2, a service can often work on lower resources level (CPU or IOPS), but bootstrap takes forever. I can recall case where service uptime was very important but bootstrap of all services executed simultaneously took 10 minutes. However, after service was up, the resources consumption was extremely low. So business decision was to use more resources just to boot the whole box faster.

Reviewer 3: ` During the bootstrap frameworks` would probably be better of as ` During bootstrap, frameworks`

> Quarkus' pilosophy is to prevent as much as possible slow and memory intensive dynamic code execution by shifting left these actions and eventually do them during the build time . A Quarkus extension is a Java piece of code acting as an adapter layer for your favorite libary or technology.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Quarkus' philosophy is to prevent as much as possible slow and memory intensive dynamic code execution by shifting left these actions and eventually do them during the build time. A Quarkus extension is a Java piece of code acting as an adapter layer for your favorite libary or technology.
```

> Description of a Quarkus extension

Reviewer 4: Same here, a `{project-name}` placeholder should probably be used (and line 48 as well).

Reviewer 4: Please disregard this one. In one of other reviews Quarkus team confirmed that `{project-name}` placeholder is no longer necessary.

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

A Quarkus extension consists of two parts:

> * Runtime module : Represent the capabilities the extension's developer exposes to the application's developer (an authentication filter, an enhanced data layer API, etc).

Reviewer 5: It could be mentioned that runtime dependencies are the ones the users will add into their POMs. Unlike the deployment ones that must not be added to user POMs.

> * Runtime module : Represent the capabilities the extension's developer exposes to the application's developer (an authentication filter, an enhanced data layer API, etc).

Reviewer 2: I think it's more about having there the classes that needs to be exposed at runtime so the features accessible by the application at runtime.

> * Deployment module: Used during the Augmentation Build time, it describes how to "deploy" a framework

Reviewer 2: s/framework/library/?

> following Quarkus philosophy. In other words, it applies all the Quarkus optimization to yoir application before actually running it.

Reviewer 5: yoir -> your

> following Quarkus philosophy. In other words, it applies all the Quarkus optimization to yoir application before actually running it.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
following the Quarkus philosophy. In other words, it applies all the Quarkus optimizations to your application before actually running it.
```

> following Quarkus philosophy. In other words, it applies all the Quarkus optimization to yoir application before actually running it.

Reviewer 2: I think we should also mention it's where we prepare things for GraalVM.

> At this point, you should have understand that most of the magic will happen at the Augmentation Build time thanks to the deployment module.

Reviewer 5: understand -> understood

> At this point, you should have understand that most of the magic will happen at the Augmentation Build time thanks to the deployment module.

Reviewer 4: Just a note. The _Augmentation Build time_ is referred to as a _deployment time_ in other documents. Using different name for the same thing may be confusing to the readers so maybe we should add some explanation here, but I agree that "augmentation time" is a better term since "deployment time" can be easily confused with a process of deploying service to the server.

Reviewer 5: I would just say "at build time". And btw "you should have understood".

Author: IMHO, deployment/augmentation is a step of the build time (just as compilation is one). My 2cts, only use "build time" hides too much subtle details

Good catch s/understand/understood

Reviewer 5: I don't have a strong opinion here. It's now down to detailing build phases which may be great to know but also could look like too much info for users trying to get their first extension working. If you want to keep "Augmentation" I'd prefer "augmentation phase of the build" though. Thanks again for taking care of this guide.

Author: I replaced this part as asked

Quarkus Application Bootstrap
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

There are three distinct bootstrap phases of a Quarkus application.

> * Augmentation: During the build time, the Quarkus extensions will load and scan your application's bytecode (including the dependencies) and configuration. Once all the metadata collected, the extensions can pre-process the frameworks bootstrap actions like your ORM, DI or REST controllers configurations. The result of the bootstrap is directly recorded into bytecode and will be part of your final application package.

Reviewer 2: s/frameworks/libraries/?

> * Static Init: During the run time, Quarkus will execute first a static init method which contains some extensions actions/configurations. When you will do your native packaging, this static method will be pre-process during the build time and the eventual generated objects will be serialized in the final native executable, so this code will not be executed in a native node (Imagine you execute a Fibonacci function during this phase, the result of the computation will be directly recorded in the native executable). In a JVM mode, there is no much difference.

Reviewer 5: native node -> native mode

> * Static Init: During the run time, Quarkus will execute first a static init method which contains some extensions actions/configurations. When you will do your native packaging, this static method will be pre-process during the build time and the eventual generated objects will be serialized in the final native executable, so this code will not be executed in a native node (Imagine you execute a Fibonacci function during this phase, the result of the computation will be directly recorded in the native executable). In a JVM mode, there is no much difference.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Static Init: During the run time, Quarkus will execute first a static init method which contains some extensions actions/configurations. When you will do your native packaging, this static method will be pre-processed during the build time and the eventual generated objects will be serialized in the final native executable, so this code will not be executed in a native mode (Imagine you execute a Fibonacci function during this phase, the result of the computation will be directly recorded in the native executable). In a JVM mode, there is no much difference.
```

> * Runtime Init: Well nothing fancy here, we do classic run time code executation. So, the more code you run on the 2 above phases, the faster your application will be.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Runtime Init: Well nothing fancy here, we do classic run time code execution. So, the more code you run during the 2 phases above, the faster your application will start.
```

> Now that everything is explained, we can start coding !!

Reviewer 2: No space before double punctuations in English.

Maven setup
~~~~~~~~~~~

=== The parent module
At the moment, all the extensions are hosted in the https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus[Quarkus repository].

[source, shell]
---------------
$ git clone https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus.git
$ cd ./quarkus/extensions

> $ mkdir smallrye-health

Reviewer 2: This command will fail as it already exists?

---------------

Your extension should be a multi-module project. So let's start by the parent `pom.xml`.
[source, xml]
---------------
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<project xmlns="http://maven.apache.org/POM/4.0.0"
         xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance"
         xsi:schemaLocation="http://maven.apache.org/POM/4.0.0 http://maven.apache.org/xsd/maven-4.0.0.xsd">
    <parent>
        <artifactId>quarkus-build-parent</artifactId>
        <groupId>io.quarkus</groupId>
        <version>999-SNAPSHOT</version>
        <relativePath>../../build-parent/pom.xml</relativePath>
    </parent>
    <modelVersion>4.0.0</modelVersion>

    <artifactId>quarkus-smallrye-health-parent</artifactId>
    <name>Quarkus - SmallRye Health</name>

    <packaging>pom</packaging>
    <modules>
        <module>deployment</module>
        <module>runtime</module>
    </modules>
</project>
---------------

> Your extensions is a child project of `quarkus-build-parent` and declares 2 sub-modules deployment and runtime. It's time now to create them.

Reviewer 5: extensions -> extension

It could be mentioned that it doesn't have to have `quarkus-build-parent` as the parent.

=== The Deployment module
[source, shell]
---------------
$ mkdir -p ./deployment/src/main/java/
---------------

> Let's have a look to the deployment's `pom.xml`.

Reviewer 6: It is kind of obvious, but you do not say where the `pom.xml` must be created.

        <artifactId>quarkus-smallrye-health-parent</artifactId>
        <groupId>io.quarkus</groupId>
        <version>999-SNAPSHOT</version>
        <relativePath>../</relativePath>
    </parent>
    <modelVersion>4.0.0</modelVersion>

    <artifactId>quarkus-smallrye-health-deployment</artifactId>
    <name>Quarkus - SmallRye Health - Deployment</name>

    <dependencies>
        <dependency>
            <groupId>io.quarkus</groupId>
            <artifactId>quarkus-core-deployment</artifactId>
        </dependency>
    </dependencies>

    <build>
        <plugins>
            <plugin>
                <artifactId>maven-compiler-plugin</artifactId>
                <configuration>
                    <annotationProcessorPaths>
                        <path>
                            <groupId>io.quarkus</groupId>
                            <artifactId>quarkus-extension-processor</artifactId>
                            <version>${project.version}</version>
                        </path>
                    </annotationProcessorPaths>
                </configuration>
            </plugin>
        </plugins>
    </build>

</project>
-------------

The key points are:

> * By conventon, the deployment module has the `-deployment` suffix (`quarkus-smallrye-health-deployment`).

Reviewer 4: conventon -> convent**i**on

* The deployment module depends on the `quarkus-core-deployment`. We will see later which dependencies are convenient to add.
* We add  the `quarkus-extension-processor` to the compiler annotation processors.

=== The Runtime module
[source, shell]
---------------
$ mkdir -p ./runtime/src/main/java/
---------------

> Let's create the runtime's `pom.xml`.

Reviewer 6: Same as the previous `pom.xml` file.

[source, xml]
-------------
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<project xmlns="http://maven.apache.org/POM/4.0.0"
         xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance"
         xsi:schemaLocation="http://maven.apache.org/POM/4.0.0 http://maven.apache.org/xsd/maven-4.0.0.xsd">
    <parent>
        <artifactId>quarkus-smallrye-health-parent</artifactId>
        <groupId>io.quarkus</groupId>
        <version>999-SNAPSHOT</version>
        <relativePath>../</relativePath>
    </parent>
    <modelVersion>4.0.0</modelVersion>

    <artifactId>quarkus-smallrye-health</artifactId>
    <name>Quarkus - SmallRye Health - Runtime</name>

    <dependencies>
        <dependency>
            <groupId>io.quarkus</groupId>
            <artifactId>quarkus-core</artifactId>
        </dependency>
    </dependencies>

    <build>
        <plugins>
            <plugin>
                <groupId>io.quarkus</groupId>

>                 <artifactId>quarkus-bootstrap-maven-plugin</artifactId>

Reviewer 4: Extension descriptor is missing. It's crucial when one does not use parent pom from quarkus:

```xml
        <executions>
          <execution>
            <phase>compile</phase>
            <goals>
              <goal>extension-descriptor</goal>
            </goals>
            <configuration>
              <deployment>${project.groupId}:${project.artifactId}-deployment:${project.version}</deployment>
            </configuration>
          </execution>
        </executions>
```

            </plugin>
            <plugin>
                <artifactId>maven-compiler-plugin</artifactId>
                <configuration>
                    <annotationProcessorPaths>
                        <path>
                            <groupId>io.quarkus</groupId>
                            <artifactId>quarkus-extension-processor</artifactId>
                            <version>${project.version}</version>
                        </path>
                    </annotationProcessorPaths>
                </configuration>
            </plugin>
        </plugins>
    </build>
</project>
-------------

The key points are:

> * By convention, the runtime module has no suffix (`quarkus-smallrye-health`).

Reviewer 2: ... as it is the artifact exposed to the end user.

> * The deployment module depends on the `quarkus-core`. We will see later which dependencies are convenient to add.

Reviewer 2: either on `quarkus-core` or on the `quarkus-core` artifact.

Author: 🤔 I'm not sure to get you point here. Could you help me please.

Reviewer 5: I guess Guillaume meant it has to be either "depends on `quarkus-core`" or "depends on the `quarkus-core` artifact" :)

> * We add  the `quarkus-bootstrap-maven-plugin` to generate the Quarkus extension descriptor included into the runtime artifact.

Reviewer 4: At the end of this sentence I would add the following: "which links it with the corresponding deployment artifact".

* We add  the `quarkus-extension-processor` to the compiler annotation processors.

=== Registering your extension.

> At this point, your extension is almost initialized. You need to declare your sub-modules to be used by other extensions. You should add to the `quarkus/build-parent/pom.xml`.

Reviewer 5: Ah, you mean that the extension is intended to be a part of the Quarkus repo here? I think that complicate the setup. It could be easier to start developing an extension as a separate project, imo.

Reviewer 2: I think both have values.

It should probably be 2 different sections. The thing with an external extension is that we do not have a proper "deployment" bom right now. I know Daniel has plans for creating a Maven mojo to create an extension so it should simplify the setup a lot.

> At this point, your extension is almost initialized. You need to declare your sub-modules to be used by other extensions. You should add to the `quarkus/build-parent/pom.xml`.

Reviewer 2: The last sentence of the paragraph is weird. You should add what?

This is how you can use your battle-tested ecosystem and take advantage of Quarkus performance and native compilation.

During this guide you understand how to develop the *Sample Greeting Extension*.
The extension will expose a customizable HTTP endpoint which simply greet the visitor.

== Prerequisites

To complete this guide, you need:

* less than 30 minutes
* https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus[Quarkus sources]
* an IDE
* JDK 1.8+ installed with JAVA_HOME configured appropriately
* Apache Maven 3.5.3+

== Basic Concepts

First things first, we will need to start with some basic concepts.

* JVM mode vs Native mode
  ** Quarkus is first and foremost a Java framework, that means you can develop, package and run classic JAR application, that's what we call *JVM mode*.
  ** Thanks to https://graalvm.org/[GraalVM] you can compile your Java application into machine specific code (like you do in Go or C++) and that's what we call *Native mode*.

The operation of compiling Java bytecode into a native system-specific machine code is named *Ahead of Time Compilation* (aka AoT).

* build time vs runtime

>   ** The build time corresponds to all the actions you apply to your Java source files to convert them into something runnable (class files, jar/war, native images). Usually this stage is composed of the compilation, annotation processing, bytecode generation, etc. At this point, everything is under developer's scope and control.

Reviewer 7: I'd add reading XML config file, scanning classes for specific annotations etc. To make it a bit more concrete than "annotation processing" which has an overloaded term.

Author: 🤔 The purpose of this section is to explain Build time and Runtime in a Java world (pre-Quarkus era). In this world,  XML reading or class scanning are usually done at *Runtime*.

But.... for people familiar with Quarkus, this paragraph could be misleading. Maybe I should rename the section *build time vs runtime with traditional Java frameworks"

Reviewer 7: ah I read too quickly and got confused indeed.

Quarkus' philosophy is to prevent as much as possible slow and memory intensive dynamic code execution by shifting left these actions and eventually do them during the build time. A Quarkus extension is a Java piece of code acting as an adapter layer for your favorite libary or technology.

== Description of a Quarkus extension

A Quarkus extension consists of two parts:

* Runtime module : Represent the capabilities the extension's developer exposes to the application's developer (an authentication filter, an enhanced data layer API, etc).
* Deployment module: Used during the Augmentation build time, it describes how to "deploy" a library
following the Quarkus philosophy. In other words, it applies all the Quarkus optimizations to your application before actually running it.

At this point, you should have understood that most of the magic will happen at the Augmentation build time thanks to the deployment module.

== Quarkus Application Bootstrap

There are three distinct bootstrap phases of a Quarkus application.

> * Augmentation: During the build time, the Quarkus extensions will load and scan your application's bytecode (including the dependencies) and configuration. Once all the metadata collected, the extensions can pre-process the libraries bootstrap actions like your ORM, DI or REST controllers configurations. The result of the bootstrap is directly recorded into bytecode and will be part of your final application package.

Reviewer 7: I'd mention reading XML config or mapping files, scanning annotations etc for it to be a bit more concrete.

Author: Yes, in this section it makes more sense to use config reading/class scanning as exemple

> * Static Init: During the run time, Quarkus will execute first a static init method which contains some extensions actions/configurations. When you will do your native packaging, this static method will be pre-processed during the build time and the eventual generated objects will be serialized in the final native executable, so this code will not be executed in a native mode (Imagine you execute a Fibonacci function during this phase, the result of the computation will be directly recorded in the native executable). In a JVM mode, there is no much difference.

Reviewer 7: Clarify the JVM effect. 
s/In a JVM mode, there is no much difference/When running the application in JVM, this static init phase is executed at the start of the application/

<2> We add  the `quarkus-bootstrap-maven-plugin` to generate the Quarkus extension descriptor included into the runtime artifact which links it with the corresponding deployment artifact.
<3> We add  the `quarkus-extension-processor` to the compiler annotation processors.

=== Extension publication

*For internal Quarkus usage*
The `create-extension` command automatically added your extension modules in the appropriate descriptors:

* Your extension (`sample-greeting`) is declared as a sub-module of `quarkus-extensions-parent` (`quarkus/extensions/pom.xml`)
* The deployment module (`quarkus-sample-greeting-deployment`) is declared as a dependency in the `quarkus-bom-deployment` (`quarkus/bom/deployment/pom.xml) thus can be used by other projects.
* The runtime module (`quarkus-sample-greeting`) is declared as a dependency in the `quarkus-bom-runtime` (`quarkus/bom/runtime/pom.xml) thus can be used by other projects.

*For application developers*
At this point, your extension is initialized, to make it visible when the developers list all Quarkus's extensions (ie. `mvn quarkus:list-extensions`) you should update the `quarkus/devtools/common/src/main/filtered/extensions.json` file.

> [source, json]

Reviewer 7: We have moved to a different model. Now the file is this
https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/blob/master/extensions/hibernate-orm/runtime/src/main/resources/META-INF/quarkus-extension.yaml

@aloubyansky can you guide Daniel through the changes we made here.

Reviewer 5: `quarkus/devtools/common/src/main/filtered/extensions.json` is actually gone. This should be removed. To be listed the extensions has to be added to either `quarkus-bom` (if it really belongs to the Quarkus repo, which I think should be an exceptional case now) or `quarkus-universe-bom` https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus-platform/blob/master/bom/runtime/pom.xml (and the corresponding `-bom-deployment`).

The thing is that we are not going to be accepting arbitrary extensions in Quarkus repo any more, so we should not be promoting development of extensions in Quarkus repo.

Registering an extension in the universe is a second step. The extension has to be released first and be available in a Maven repo.

[INFO] BUILD SUCCESS
[INFO] ------------------------------------------------------------------------
[INFO] Total time: 10.034 s
[INFO] Finished at: 2019-07-03 12:02:59+02:00
[INFO] ------------------------------------------------------------------------
-------------

Looks good!! Congratulations you just finished your first extension.
It's time now to propose a Pull Request to https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus[Quarkus Github repository].
Once merged, you need to wait for a Quarkus public release (every 2 weeks) for a general availability of your feature.

=== Debugging your extension

_If debugging is the process of removing bugs, then programming must be the process of putting them in._
Edsger W. Dijkstra

*Debugging your application build*

Since your extension deployment is made during the application build, this process is triggered by your build tool.
That means if your want to debug this phase you need to launch your build tool with the remote debug mode switched one.

_Maven_

You can activate Maven remote debugging by using `mvnDebug`. You can launch your application with the following command line:

> `mvnDebug clean compile quarkud:dev`

Reviewer 7: s/quarkud/quarkus/

Since your extension deployment is made during the application build, this process is triggered by your build tool.
That means if your want to debug this phase you need to launch your build tool with the remote debug mode switched one.

_Maven_

You can activate Maven remote debugging by using `mvnDebug`. You can launch your application with the following command line:

`mvnDebug clean compile quarkus:dev`

By default, Maven will wait for a connection on `localhost:8000`. Now, you can run your IDE `Remote` configuration to attach it to `localhost:5000`.

_Gradle_

TODO

*Debugging your test extension*

We have seen together how to test your extension and sometimes things don't go so well and you want to debug your tests.
Same principle here, the trick is to enable the Maven Surfire remote debugging in order to attach an IDE `Remote` configuration.

[source, shell]
-------------
$ cd `./greeting`
$ mvn clean test -Dmaven.surefire.debug
-------------

By default, Maven will wait for a connection on `localhost:5005`.

=== Extension publication

Now that you just finish to build your first extension you should be eager to use it in a Quarkus application! 

*Classic Maven publication*

> Because your extension produces a classic JAR, the easiest way to share your extension is to publish it to a Maven repository.

Reviewer 5: Given that it produces more than one artifact, let's probably use the plural form, i.e. `...produces classic JARs...`

```
...
    <dependencyManagement>
        <dependencies>
            <dependency>
                <groupId>${quarkus.platform.group-id}</groupId>
                <artifactId>${quarkus.platform.artifact-id}</artifactId>
                <version>${quarkus.platform.version}</version>
                <type>pom</type>
                <scope>import</scope>
            </dependency>
        </dependencies>
    </dependencyManagement>
    <dependencies>
        <dependency>
            <groupId>io.quarkus</groupId>
            <artifactId>quarkus-resteasy</artifactId>
        </dependency>
        <dependency>
            <groupId>org.acme</groupId>
            <artifactId>quarkus-greeting</artifactId>
        </dependency>
    </dependencies>
...
```

From a extension developper standpoint this publication strategy is very handy and fast but Quarkus wants to go one step further by also ensure a reliability of the ecosystem for the people who will use the extensions.
Think about it, we all had a poor Developper eXperience with an unmaintained library, a incompatibility between dependencies (and we don't even talk about legal issues).
That's why there is the Quarkus Platform.

> *Quarkus Platform*

Reviewer 5: The first entry point into the extension ecosystem will be Quarkus Universe, which aggregates extensions from the supported platform and the rest of the ecosystem. It's basically a catalog of all the known extensions. Our project manipulating tooling (create project, list extensions, add extensions) are using the universe as the source of extensions.

The platform is a subset of the universe that we selected and guarantee a certain level of quality for (besides the technological criteria).

Author: Not sure if you proposes a replacement for the sentence or if you want me to add additionnal comments?

Reviewer 5: Sorry for the confusion. We actually have not released `quarkus-platform-bom` yet. We currently have `quarkus-universe-bom` which will be replaced by `quarkus-platform-bom` at some point.

> Quarkus proposes a `quarkus-platform-bom` which is a certified list of extensions placed under the Quarkus Platform label. From an application developper, the objectives of the platform are:

Reviewer 5: For today, it should be mentioning `quarkus-universe-bom` instead.

* To guarantee a supportability of the extension (bugfix, security issues, dependency upgrades)
* To ease the extension discovery through the Quarkus CLI or https://code.quarkus.io/

> * To ensure a global consitency of the extension ecosystem

Reviewer 7: s/consitency/consistency/

> Note: As for now, the process to propose a new extension is not defined yet. Your best chance is to present your extension on the https://groups.google.com/forum/#!forum/quarkus-dev[Quarkus Google Group] or on https://quarkusio.zulipchat.com/[Zulip] and wait for an official invitation to join the Quarkus Platform.

Reviewer 7: [TIP]
.Should I publish my extension to the platform?
----
If you feel your extensions is for you or a limited group, simply publishing to maven is fine.
If the extension solves a general problem, it is very handy for Quarkus users to see it on code.quarkus.io.
But this comes with some responsibility for you, keeping it up to date with Quarkus minor releases (every month or so at the moment).

When in doubt, have a conversation with the community in the https://groups.google.com/forum/#!forum/quarkus-dev[Quarkus Google Group]. We can make a collective decision.
----

== Conclusion

> Creating new extension can look impressing at first but once you understood the Quarkus game-changer paradigm (build time vs. runtime) the structure makes sense.

Reviewer 5: `can look impressing` should probably be re-phrased to something like "may appear to be an intricate task".

////
This guide is maintained in the main Quarkus repository
and pull requests should be submitted there:
https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/tree/master/docs/src/main/asciidoc
////
= Quarkus - Building my first extension

include::./attributes.adoc[]

https://quarkus.io/extensions/[Quarkus extensions] enhance your application just as projects dependencies do.
The role of the extensions is about leveraging Quarkus paradigms to integrate seamlessly a library into Quarkus.
This is how you can use your battle-tested ecosystem and take advantage of Quarkus performance and native compilation.

In this guide we are going to develop the *Sample Greeting Extension*.

> The extension will expose a customizable HTTP endpoint which simply greets the visitor.

Reviewer 2: I think it should be extra clear that:
* you don't need an extension to add a servlet
* it's a simplified example so you don't really see the power of moving things to build time or simplifying the build of native images

                        </configuration>
                    </execution>
                </executions>
            </plugin>
            <plugin>
                <groupId>org.apache.maven.plugins</groupId>
                <artifactId>maven-compiler-plugin</artifactId>
                <configuration>
                    <annotationProcessorPaths>
                        <path>
                            <groupId>io.quarkus</groupId>
                            <artifactId>quarkus-extension-processor</artifactId> <!--3-->
                            <version>${quarkus.version}</version>
                        </path>
                    </annotationProcessorPaths>
                </configuration>
            </plugin>
        </plugins>
    </build>
</project>
-------------

The key points are:

<1> By convention, the runtime module has no suffix (`greeting`) as it is the artifact exposed to the end user.
<2> We add  the `quarkus-bootstrap-maven-plugin` to generate the Quarkus extension descriptor included into the runtime artifact which links it with the corresponding deployment artifact.
<3> We add  the `quarkus-extension-processor` to the compiler annotation processors.

> 

Author: Nope. it's attached to the runtime module compilation
```
            <plugin>
                <groupId>io.quarkus</groupId>
                <artifactId>quarkus-bootstrap-maven-plugin</artifactId>
                <version>${quarkus.version}</version>
                <executions>
                    <execution>
                        <goals>
                            <goal>extension-descriptor</goal>
                        </goals>
                        <phase>compile</phase>
                        <configuration>
                            <deployment>${project.groupId}:${project.artifactId}-deployment:${project.version}
                            </deployment>
                        </configuration>
                    </execution>
                </executions>
            </plugin>
```
`extension-descriptor` it generates a `quarkus-extension.yaml` file:
```
---
metadata: {}
group-id: "org.acme"
artifact-id: "quarkus-greeting"
version: "1.0-SNAPSHOT"
name: "Greeting Extension - Runtime"
```
To be honest, I don't even know how it can be configured via Maven properties

> 

Author: Based on https://quarkus.io/guides/writing-extensions
> There is one step (specific to the Quarkus source tree) that you should do manually when creating a new extension: create a quarkus-extension.yaml file that describe your extension inside the runtime module src/main/resources/META-INF folder.

Assuming that the most of the future extensions will be hosted outside Quarkus repo, can we skip this point in this guide? IMHO, this action will be part of a Quarkus universe integration.
WDYT?

    @Override
    protected void doGet(HttpServletRequest req, HttpServletResponse resp) throws ServletException, IOException { // <2>
        resp.getWriter().write("Hello");
    }
}
-------------

<1> As usual, defining a servlet requires to extend `javax.servlet.http.HttpServlet`.
<2> Since we want to respond to the HTTP GET verb, we override the `doGet` method and write `Hello` in the Servlet response's output stream.

=== Deploying the Greeting feature

Quarkus magic relies on bytecode generation at build time rather than waiting runtime code evaluation, that's the role of your extension's `deployment` module
Calm down, we know, bytecode is hard and you don't want to do it manually, Quarkus proposes a high level API to do ease your job.
Thanks to basic concepts, you will describe the items to produce/consume and the corresponding steps in order to generate the bytecode to produce during the deployment time.

The `io.quarkus.builder.item.BuildItem` concept represents object instances you will produce or consume (and at some point convert into byte code) thanks to `io.quarkus.deployment.annotations.BuildStep` methods which describe your extension's deployment tasks.

> Get back to the generated `org.acme.quarkus.greeting.deployment.GreetingProcessor` class.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Go back to the generated `org.acme.quarkus.greeting.deployment.GreetingProcessor` class.
```

[source, java]
-------------
package org.acme.quarkus.greeting.deployment;

import io.quarkus.deployment.annotations.BuildStep;
import io.quarkus.deployment.builditem.FeatureBuildItem;

class GreetingProcessor {

    private static final String FEATURE = "greeting";

    @BuildStep // <1>
    FeatureBuildItem feature() {
        return new FeatureBuildItem(FEATURE); // <2>
    }

}
-------------

> <1> `feature()` method is annotated with `@BuildStep` which means it identified as a deployment task Quarkus will have to execute during the deployment.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
<1> `feature()` method is annotated with `@BuildStep` which means it is identified as a deployment task Quarkus will have to execute during the deployment.
```

Since the method is returning a `BuildItem` it is considered to be a producer of that item. If the `BuildStep` method required a `BuildItem` parameter, it is a consumer.

`BuildStep` methods are run concurrently at augmentation time to augment the application.

> They use a producer/consumer model, where a step is guaranteed not to be run until all items that it is consuming have been created.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
They use a producer/consumer model, where a step is guaranteed not to be run until all the items that it is consuming have been produced.
```

> <2> `io.quarkus.deployment.builditem.FeatureBuildItem` is a implementation of `BuildItem` which represents the description of an extension.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
<2> `io.quarkus.deployment.builditem.FeatureBuildItem` is an implementation of `BuildItem` which represents the description of an extension.
```

> This `BuildItem` will be used by Quarkus to display information to the users when your application is starting.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This `BuildItem` will be used by Quarkus to display information to the users when the application is starting.
```

> There are many `BuildItem` implementations, each one represent an aspect of the deployment process.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
There are many `BuildItem` implementations, each one represents an aspect of the deployment process.
```

Here are some examples:

* `ServletBuildItem`: describes a Servlet (name, path, etc.) we want to generate during the deployment.
* `BeanContainerBuildItem`: describes a container used to store and retrieve object instances during the deployment.

> If you don't find a `BuildItem` for we what you want to achieve, you can create your own implementation. Keep in mind that a `BuildItem` should be should be fine-grained as possible, representing a specific part of the deployment.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you don't find a `BuildItem` for what you want to achieve, you can create your own implementation. Keep in mind that a `BuildItem` should be as fine-grained as possible, representing a specific part of the deployment.
```

To create your `BuildItem` you can extend:

> * `io.quarkus.builder.item.SimpleBuildItem` if you need only a single instance of the item during the deployment (eg. `BeanContainerBuildItem`, you only want one container).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* `io.quarkus.builder.item.SimpleBuildItem` if you need only a single instance of the item during the deployment (e.g. `BeanContainerBuildItem`, you only want one container).
```

> * `io.quarkus.builder.item.MultiBuildItem` if you want to have multiple instances (eg. ServletBuildItem, you can produce many Servlets during the deployment).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* `io.quarkus.builder.item.MultiBuildItem` if you want to have multiple instances (e.g. `ServletBuildItem`, you can produce many Servlets during the deployment).
```

It's now time to declare our HTTP endpoint. To do so, we need to produce a `ServletBuildItem`.
At this point, we are sure you understood that if the `quarkus-undertow` dependency proposes Servlet support for our `runtime` module, we will need the `quarkus-undertow-deployment` dependency into our `deployment` module to have access to the `io.quarkus.undertow.deployment.ServletBuildItem`.

> Update the `./greeting/deployment/pom.xml` as follow:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Update the `./greeting/deployment/pom.xml` as follows:
```

[source, xml]
-------------
    <dependencies>
        <dependency>
            <groupId>io.quarkus</groupId>
            <artifactId>quarkus-core-deployment</artifactId>
        </dependency>
        <dependency>
            <groupId>io.quarkus</groupId>
            <artifactId>quarkus-greeting</artifactId>
        </dependency>
        <dependency>
            <groupId>io.quarkus</groupId>
            <artifactId>quarkus-undertow-deployment</artifactId>
        </dependency>
    </dependencies>
-------------

> We can now update `org.acme.quarkus.greeting.deployment.GreetingProcessor`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We can now update `org.acme.quarkus.greeting.deployment.GreetingProcessor`:
```

[source, java]
-------------
package org.acme.quarkus.greeting.deployment;

import io.quarkus.deployment.annotations.BuildStep;
import io.quarkus.deployment.builditem.FeatureBuildItem;
import org.acme.quarkus.greeting.GreetingServlet;
import io.quarkus.undertow.deployment.ServletBuildItem;

class GreetingProcessor {

    private static final String FEATURE = "greeting";

    @BuildStep
    FeatureBuildItem feature() {
        return new FeatureBuildItem(FEATURE);
    }

    @BuildStep
    ServletBuildItem createServlet() { // <1>
      ServletBuildItem servletBuildItem = ServletBuildItem.builder("greeting", GreetingServlet.class.getName())
        .addMapping("/greeting")
        .build(); // <2>
      return servletBuildItem;
    }

}
-------------

<1> We add a `createServlet` method which returns a `ServletBuildItem` and annotate it with `@BuildStep`.

> Now, Quarkus will process this new task which will result in the bytecode generation of a Servlet at build time.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Now, Quarkus will process this new task which will result in the bytecode generation of the Servlet registration at build time.
```

<2> `ServletBuildItem` proposes a fluent API to instantiate a Servlet named `greeting` of type `GreetingServlet` (it's our class provided by our extension `runtime` module), and map it the `/greeting` path.

=== Testing the Greeting feature

When developing a Quarkus extension, you mainly want to test your feature is properly deployed in an application and works as expected.
That's why the tests will be hosted in the `deployment` module.

> Let's add testing dependencies into the  `./greeting/deployment/pom.xml`:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Let's add the testing dependencies into the  `./greeting/deployment/pom.xml`:
```

[source, xml]
-------------
    <dependencies>
        <dependency>
            <groupId>io.quarkus</groupId>
            <artifactId>quarkus-core-deployment</artifactId>
        </dependency>
        <dependency>
            <groupId>org.acme</groupId>
            <artifactId>quarkus-greeting</artifactId>
        </dependency>
        <dependency>
            <groupId>io.quarkus</groupId>
            <artifactId>quarkus-undertow-deployment</artifactId>
        </dependency>
        <dependency>
            <groupId>io.quarkus</groupId>
            <artifactId>quarkus-junit5-internal</artifactId> <!--1-->
          <scope>test</scope>
        </dependency>
        <dependency>
            <groupId>io.rest-assured</groupId>
            <artifactId>rest-assured</artifactId> <!--2-->
          <scope>test</scope>
        </dependency>
    </dependencies>
-------------

> <1> Quarkus proposes facilities to test extension via the `quarkus-junit5-internal`, in particular the `io.quarkus.test.QuarkusUnitTest` runner which starts a mock application with your extension.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
<1> Quarkus proposes facilities to test extensions via the `quarkus-junit5-internal` artifact, in particular the `io.quarkus.test.QuarkusUnitTest` runner which starts an application with your extension.
```

[INFO] Reactor Summary for Greeting Extension - Parent 1.0-SNAPSHOT:
[INFO]
[INFO] Greeting Extension - Parent ........................ SUCCESS [  0.081 s]
[INFO] Greeting Extension - Runtime ....................... SUCCESS [  1.044 s]
[INFO] Greeting Extension - Deployment .................... SUCCESS [  1.253 s]
[INFO] ------------------------------------------------------------------------
[INFO] BUILD SUCCESS
[INFO] ------------------------------------------------------------------------
[INFO] Total time:  2.479 s
[INFO] Finished at: 2019-07-03T12:00:00+01:00
[INFO] ------------------------------------------------------------------------
-------------

Looks good!! Congratulations you just finished your first extension.

=== Debugging your extension

_If debugging is the process of removing bugs, then programming must be the process of putting them in._
Edsger W. Dijkstra

*Debugging your application build*

Since your extension deployment is made during the application build, this process is triggered by your build tool.
That means if your want to debug this phase you need to launch your build tool with the remote debug mode switched one.

> _Maven_

Reviewer 2: Maybe use proper titles?

You can activate Maven remote debugging by using `mvnDebug`. You can launch your application with the following command line:

> `mvnDebug clean compile quarkus:dev`

Reviewer 2: Please use full source extracts even for this.

> By default, Maven will wait for a connection on `localhost:8000`. Now, you can run your IDE `Remote` configuration to attach it to `localhost:5000`.

Reviewer 2: 8000 or 5000?

_Gradle_

> TODO

Reviewer 2: ?

Author: I wasn't planning to cover Gradle in a first place... but finally it's done 😄

*Debugging your test extension*

We have seen together how to test your extension and sometimes things don't go so well and you want to debug your tests.

> Same principle here, the trick is to enable the Maven Surfire remote debugging in order to attach an IDE `Remote` configuration.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Same principle here, the trick is to enable the Maven Surefire remote debugging in order to attach an IDE `Remote` configuration.
```

[source, shell]
-------------
$ cd `./greeting`
$ mvn clean test -Dmaven.surefire.debug
-------------

By default, Maven will wait for a connection on `localhost:5005`.

=== Extension publication

Now that you just finish to build your first extension you should be eager to use it in a Quarkus application! 

*Classic Maven publication*

Because your extension produces a classics JARs, the easiest way to share your extension is to publish it to a Maven repository.
Once published you can simply declare it with your project dependencies

> ```

Reviewer 2: Please use proper Asciidoc source blocks.

...
    <dependencyManagement>
        <dependencies>
            <dependency>
                <groupId>io.quarkus</groupId>
                <artifactId>quarkus-universe-bom</artifactId>

>                 <version>1.0.1.Final</version>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
                <version>{quarkus-version}</version>
```
Same remark about sub attributes.

                <type>pom</type>
                <scope>import</scope>
            </dependency>
        </dependencies>
    </dependencyManagement>
    <dependencies>
        <dependency>
            <groupId>io.quarkus</groupId>
            <artifactId>quarkus-resteasy</artifactId>
        </dependency>
        <dependency>
            <groupId>org.acme</groupId>
            <artifactId>quarkus-greeting</artifactId>
        </dependency>
    </dependencies>
...
```

> From a extension developper standpoint this publication strategy is very handy and fast but Quarkus wants to go one step further by also ensure a reliability of the ecosystem for the people who will use the extensions.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
From an extension developer standpoint this publication strategy is very handy and fast but Quarkus wants to go one step further by also ensuring a reliability of the ecosystem for the people who will use the extensions.
```

> Think about it, we all had a poor Developper eXperience with an unmaintained library, a incompatibility between dependencies (and we don't even talk about legal issues).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Think about it, we all had a poor Developer Experience with an unmaintained library, an incompatibility between dependencies (and we don't even talk about legal issues).
```

That's why there is the Quarkus Platform.

*Quarkus Platform*

Quarkus proposes a `quarkus-universe-bom` which is a certified list of extensions placed under the Quarkus Platform label. From an application developper, the objectives of the platform are:

> * To guarantee a supportability of the extension (bugfix, security issues, dependency upgrades)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* To guarantee a supportability of the extension (bugfix, security issues, dependency upgrades)
```
That is not exactly true.

Author: What do you mean? How can I correct it?

Reviewer 7: Looks stale so resolving

* To ease the extension discovery through the Quarkus CLI or https://code.quarkus.io/
* To ensure a global consistency of the extension ecosystem

[TIP]
.Should I publish my extension to the platform?
If you feel your extensions is for you or a limited group, simply publishing to Maven is fine.
If the extension solves a general problem, it is very handy for Quarkus users to see it on https://code.quarkus.io.
But this comes with some responsibility for you, keeping it up to date with Quarkus minor releases (every month or so at the moment).
When in doubt, have a conversation with the community in the https://groups.google.com/forum/#!forum/quarkus-dev[Quarkus Google Group]. We can make a collective decision.

[NOTE]

> As for now, the process to propose a new extension is not defined yet. Your best chance is to present your extension on the https://groups.google.com/forum/#!forum/quarkus-dev[Quarkus Google Group] or on https://quarkusio.zulipchat.com/[Zulip] and wait for an official invitation to join the Quarkus Platform.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As for now, the process to propose a new extension is not defined yet. Your best chance is to present your extension on the https://groups.google.com/forum/#!forum/quarkus-dev[Quarkus Google Group] and wait for an official invitation to join the Quarkus Platform.
```

it's easy to miss things on Zulip

== Conclusion

> Creating new extension may appear to be an intricate task at first but once you understood the Quarkus game-changer paradigm (build time vs. runtime) the structure makes sense.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Creating new extensions may appear to be an intricate task at first but once you understood the Quarkus game-changer paradigm (build time vs runtime) the structure of an extension makes perfectly sense.
```

> As usual, along the path Quarkus simplifies things under the hood (Maven Mojo, bytecode generation or testing) to make it pleasant to develop new feature.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As usual, along the path Quarkus simplifies things under the hood (Maven Mojo, bytecode generation or testing) to make it pleasant to develop new features.
```

To create your `BuildItem` you can extend:

* `io.quarkus.builder.item.SimpleBuildItem` if you need only a single instance of the item during the deployment (e.g. `BeanContainerBuildItem`, you only want one container).
* `io.quarkus.builder.item.MultiBuildItem` if you want to have multiple instances (e.g. `ServletBuildItem`, you can produce many Servlets during the deployment).

It's now time to declare our HTTP endpoint. To do so, we need to produce a `ServletBuildItem`.
At this point, we are sure you understood that if the `quarkus-undertow` dependency proposes Servlet support for our `runtime` module, we will need the `quarkus-undertow-deployment` dependency into our `deployment` module to have access to the `io.quarkus.undertow.deployment.ServletBuildItem`.

Update the `./greeting/deployment/pom.xml` as follows:

[source, xml]
----
    <dependencies>
        <dependency>
            <groupId>io.quarkus</groupId>
            <artifactId>quarkus-core-deployment</artifactId>

>         </dependency>

Reviewer 5: BTW, direct dependency on quarkus-core-deployment isn't necessary once quarkus-undertow-deployment has been added (it gets pulled in as a transitive dep instead).

Author: Good point. The core deployment comes from the MOJO it could be misleading for newcomers

  static final QuarkusUnitTest config = new QuarkusUnitTest()
    .setArchiveProducer(() -> ShrinkWrap.create(JavaArchive.class)); // <1>

  @Test
  public void shouldGreet() {
    RestAssured.when().get("/greeting").then().statusCode(200).body(containsString("Hello")); // <2>
  }

}
----

<1> We register a Junit Extension which will start a Quarkus application with the Greeting extension.
<2> We verify the application has a `greeting` endpoint responding to a HTTP GET request with a OK status (200) and a plain text body containing `Hello`

Time to test!!

[source, shell]
----
$ mvn clean test
[INFO] Scanning for projects...
[INFO] ------------------------------------------------------------------------
[INFO] Reactor Build Order:
[INFO]
[INFO] Greeting Extension - Parent                                        [pom]
[INFO] Greeting Extension - Runtime                                       [jar]
[INFO] Greeting Extension - Deployment                                    [jar]
[INFO]
...
[INFO]
-------------------------------------------------------
 T E S T S
-------------------------------------------------------
Running org.acme.quarkus.greeting.deployment.GreetingTest

> Tests run: 0, Failures: 0, Errors: 0, Skipped: 0, Time elapsed: 0.001 sec

Reviewer 5: So the test actually didn't run.
